Sun, Oct 25
Benoit
====== Ministerial Staff: The Life and Times of Parliament's Statutory Orphans ======

===== "Exempting" the Minister's Staff =====

There is also an historic perspective to be considered in this critique.
The public service exemption for ministerial staff was created at a time
when a Minister’s staff comprised only 3 to five people; most of whom
played a clerical role, and whose impact on the political impartiality
of the public service would be negligible. Loretta O’Connor’s research
seems to bear this out. She writes: “Prior to 1950, a Minister was only
permitted five staff exempted from the provisions of the Civil Service
Act. They included the private secretary/executive assistant, two
stenographers, one messenger and the Minister’s personal secretary.”

The public service exemption represents a welcome and respectable
option for those with a genuine interest in civil service but to most, it
is a safety net, a viable alternative to unemployment if no private sector
work can be found or alternatively, a safe place to park their careers
while they shift their focus to family and take advantage of the generous
parental and other benefits on offer.

Mr. Saint-Martin recounts many of the
traditional objections raised by those opposed to this rule: that
ministerial assistants are by nature partisan operatives and are unable
to achieve the level of political neutrality required of public servants;
that their appointment through this “backdoor” amounts to a political patronage and is offensive to the principles of openness, transparency,
and merit meant to govern appointments within the public service; that
this form of politicization by the party in power can be used as an
instrument of political control to influence the behaviour of
administrators insomuch as the appointed managers share a political
ideology and solidarity with the government in power.

The question of the appropriateness of the ministerial staff exemption
that affords seasoned political advisors priority access into the public
service remains a difficult one. On balance, I would say that few of those
I interviewed felt this did, in fact, pose a serious threat to the political
neutrality of the bureaucracy, although some were vehemently opposed
to the elitism and sense of entitlement this privilege represents.Although
it was recognized that the potential for abuse within this system can
exist if Deputy Ministers or other delegated authorities within the departments and the PSC do not exercise due diligence with regard to
senior appointments, for the most part, there seemed to be limited
passion for the abolition of this practice.